The Data ROI Toolkit: 
How to Determine the 
Value of Your Data Initiatives

A   W H I T E   P A P E R   B Y   D A T A I K U

www.dataiku.com

1

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuINTRODUCTION

SPENDING & THE HYPE CYCLE

There is no sign that data science is on the decline. Businesses have 
jumped on the bandwagon, investing in expensive data teams, 
infrastructure, and tools in hopes of improving or increasing the 
velocity and output of the team, but there is little understanding of 
how to calculate the impact of that data spending.

At the time, experts claimed that these investments would take 
years to pay off. Here we are years later, still with billions and billions 
of dollars in big data-related costs (from staff to tools), still investing 
and putting faith in data teams. And yet many enterprises report not 
seeing a return on their investment and are left unable to prove that 
any of it is really worth the time and the money. 

Looking at some of the key areas driving spending over the next 
few years, Gartner forecasts $2.9 trillion in new business value 
opportunities attributable to AI by 2021, as well as the ability to 
recover 6.2 billion hours of worker productivity.
 
Yet without hard numbers pointing to success, it is difficult for 
executives to continue to invest thousands (or millions) of dollars on 
the latest data efforts. Indeed, any enterprise that has a data team, 
it seems, is reevaluating their productivity and return on investment 
(ROI). And anyone looking to spin up a new data division is doing 
their homework first, closely examining costs and potential ROI 
before diving in.

2

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuREAL-WORLD ROI CALCULATION: FACTS & 
FIGURES

Many companies are, of course, reluctant to disclose the ROI they have received from 
their data science efforts (especially for specific projects that provide a competitive 
advantage). However, in February 2018, Forbes reported that Netflix credits its content 
recommendation engine with reducing customer churn to the tune of $1 billion 
annually. 

In a study sponsored by Teradata conducted by Forbes and McKinsey, large 
enterprises reported that data efforts improved company growth by just 1 to 3 percent 
on average. But still, in this study, only 37 percent of respondents could quantify 
the business case for big data analytics, while 47 percent could not and 9 percent 
reported they had “no clear vision.” And yet another study by BCG estimated 20 to 
30 percent EBITDA gains for data-driven companies. So clearly this is something that 
today, most companies struggle with (you are not alone!) - and that analysts struggle 
to define it too. 

So the bottom line is that while most companies (and analysts) struggle with 
calculating big data ROI, including what exactly they need to measure to get there, 
larger data suggests that investing in big data, data science, machine learning, etc., is 
well worth it - for example, this study by the International Institute for Analytics (IIA). 

But how can your business concretely show ROI?

3

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuCHALLENGES TO CALCULATING 
DATA SCIENCE ROI 

Of course, when it comes to ROI, it always seems to be easier said than done. The reality of measuring 
the return on investments in data teams and projects, nevermind data tools and technologies, can be 
particularly challenging because: 

• 

It’s often difficult to isolate the contribution of data alone to improvements, especially larger 
business outcomes (like higher profit margins, lower costs, etc.). 

•  The calculation is complicated because the value isn’t all in one number - it can be spread 

across multiple departments and teams.

For these reasons, measuring ROI for data projects can end up being a data project in and of itself, which 
is often difficult to justify. 

The goal of this white paper is to address and alleviate some of these challenges for an easier path 
to providing a clear ROI for your data efforts. Specifically we focus on investing in tools, which can 
ultimately unlock additional support from leaders and other teams in the company that will provide 
continued fodder for a thriving data culture.

WHAT DOES ROI 
ACTUALLY MEAN?

The question isn’t so much what does ROI mean, but rather what can it mean - businesses invest in 
data teams, infrastructures, and tools for all different reasons and are executing different projects at 
various stages of maturity. So it makes sense that when it comes to figuring out ROI, it’s not a uniform 
calculation. 

Therefore, the first step in calculating ROI is to define “success” for the particular business and 
considering all the ways - directly and indirectly - that data, or a data department, has made 
contributions. Value can come in many different forms, so the biggest part of the work involved is often 
determining all the possible ways that data could be bringing success. The list of factors are different for 
each business, but the universal contributions are:

5

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuPOSITIVES

Time Saved
• 

• 

This is the easiest to quantify. The salaried-time saved 
through data initiatives is easy money you can put 
straight in the bank (or plug back into new initiatives). 
If data cleaning used to take you 10 hours per data 
scientist per week, and through a new initiative you 
can expect that to drop to 1 hour per week, you will 
immediately save money.
However, this isn’t as straightforward as it first appears. 
The time saved by data initiatives is rarely constrained 
to within the data team; you may need to look across 
the entire company to fully realize the ramifications of 
each project. If you would prefer to be conservative in 
your calculations, you may choose to limit this metric 
to the data team only. This also increases the ease of 
analysis prep, saving time for whoever is doing the ROI 
calculations!

Reduced Internal Churn
• 

Data Scientists and Analysts are hot commodities right 
now; according to Accenture, upwards of 80% of new 
data science jobs are not being filled. Thus, keeping data 
scientist morale high is critical to the continued success 
of your business. This ties into time saved because when 
data initiatives save data scientists from drudgery, they 
are happier in the workplace and free to work on more 
complicated, revolutionary tasks.

•  While it is difficult to put a monetary value on this, we 
can extrapolate. According to Glassdoor, the average 
data scientist salary is $117,000. If a data scientist quits 
for a more interesting or better paying position, it could 
take up to a year of recruiting efforts to refill the role, 
considering there are over 20,000 open data scientist 
job postings. So while you would save $117,000 (plus 
~$10,000 in benefits), you lose a significant portion of a 
recruiter’s time (priced at $51,000 a year) while slowing 
down your existing data flow and increasing stress on the 
remaining data team. If the data team could complete 
6 projects a year, each averaging $1 million ROI, and 
without this data scientist are now able to complete only 
5.5 projects in a year, then that’s a loss of $500,000 and 
a feedback loop is created as there is more stress on the 
existing data team, who then are liable to quit, which is 
liable to slow down projects even more, etc. 
Approximate value: priceless
(Okay, but really): [Avg annual rate of DS churn](500,000 
- 127,000 + 0.05(51000)) = $375,550 x [Avg annual 
rate of DS churn]

• 
• 

6

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuMore Customers
• 

This is a twofold benefit. When data initiatives 
demonstrate your company’s commitment to their 
customers, they are more likely to choose you 
over competitors, giving you an edge. Additionally, 
customers are less likely to churn when their 
experience is tailored to their individual needs. Data 
initiatives can make this sort of luxury experience 
possible without radically increased staffing costs.
To calculate this benefit, you need to track the rate 
of customer engagement in the period following 
the initiative, and compare it with the previous rate. 
Subtract the cost of marketing the data initiative to 
prospective customers from the increase in customer 
engagement (or a percentage thereof if other 
launches or factors may have contributed).
Customer trust is also a factor to consider, along 
the lines of predictive maintenance. If you suffer 
from a serious data problem, you may never recover 
the trust of your consumer base. This is impossible 
to calculate, but should figure into your project 
prioritization.

• 

• 

Reduced Production Costs
This value is entirely dependent on the individual project. 
Data Initiatives can improve accuracy and efficiency across 
industries. A few common projects and their impacts are
 ■

Predictive maintenance
Money saved from not having to replace machines or 
systems that have catastrophic breakdown, decreased 
customer churn due to failures, fewer staff required for 
maintenance, and fewer redundant parts/contingencies 
purchased 
Anomaly detection
 ■ Healthcare: faster successful patient turnover and 

fewer unnecessary medical procedures. 

 ■ Finance: reduced fraud 
 ■ Retail: decreased staffing costs and improved speed 

of launch

Recommendation Engine 
Increased customer engagement and brand loyalty.
Customer Service Chatbot
Decreased support operating costs and improved 
customer experience

 ■

 ■

 ■

7

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuCONS - THE COSTS

While data initiatives (when realistic goals that are 
operationalized) have financial benefits, there are some 
short term losses that can factor into the overall ROI.

Workflow Disruption
• 

If your data initiative has internal ramifications, there 
will be a short term in productivity as users adapt to the 
change. This may also cause a drop in morale if users do 
not fully understand the benefits of the change. However, 
taking the time to get buy-in can help mitigate this.
Depending on the severity of the shift, budget for 
a reasonable percentage of time lost to change 
inefficiencies.

• 

Education
• 

If you are working on cutting edge data science, you 
may need to educate your team into this new terrain. 
While this also has a benefit of decreasing data 
scientist churn,—when the company invests in them, 
they notice—in the short term, this will take time and 
funding.

[Number of hours spent] x [Number of team 
members learning] x [salary of team] + [cost of 
tuition/resources]

Tools
• 

If you leverage a data science tool to execute on your 
data initiatives, you must factor in the subscription price 
into your ROI calculation.

ROI CALCULATION 
WORKSHEET EXAMPLE 

Often one of the biggest costs when it comes to really ramping up the velocity 
of data projects or building a data team are the tools and technology required 
to thrive. This can be a difficult investment because it’s inherently difficult to 
calculate ROI for tools of any kind, but on top of that, data science tools are 
relatively new, so it’s not necessarily globally accepted that they’re critical (unlike, 
say, a CRM, which most businesses would use without question). Add that on top 
of the aforementioned challenges of calculating the ROI of data projects more 
broadly, and things get complicated quickly. 

To clear the waters, we created a baseline ROI calculator for you to determine the 
ROI for data science tools investment. Test out the Excel worksheet that came with 
this whitepaper for yourself.

8

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuLESS TANGIBLE ROI 
FACTORS TO CONSIDER

It’s worth mentioning that there are other factors businesses might want to consider when looking at the ROI 
of data science outside of the standard success definitions. These tend to be much less quantifiable, but can 
be equally important when it comes to the longer-term image of a company and brand. For example:

The Risk Of Non-Compliance
Not investing in data science more broadly or a data science platform specifically can increases the chances of a 
catastrophic public relations issue (such as a large data breach) or fines due to regulatory non-compliance (like GDPR - for 
example).

The Cost Of Disruption
Data-savvy companies are shaking up every industry, so it’s important to consider what the business might be losing 
by not being the first one and the most innovative one in the space when it comes to machine learning, deep learning, 
artificial intelligence, etc. Or, at the very least, it’s important to start considering ways to become data-driven so that even 
if your business isn’t the first in the industry to do so, it won’t be the last to jump on board. Disruption also influences staff 
turnover - talented staff might move on to other more cutting-edge companies.

The Value Of Digital Maturity
Today, customers often place more trust in companies that have a high digital maturity, providing more personal 
information or making more purchases as a result of this trust. The use of data science platforms put enterprises at the 
forefront of the big data era when it comes to both innovation and data governance, which is more likely to result in this 
consumer trust (though customer fear of becoming a “product” by providing their data is also a reality). 

These consideration factors are tightly related to long-term company performance, which is, in turn, intertwines with 
analytics maturity (as the International Institute for Analytics found).

9

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuHOW TO ENSURE 
THAT YOU CAN 
TRUST YOUR ROI

Even the best equation can’t solve the question of ROI for you. In order 
to make sure your calculations are robust, make sure that you are:

•  Conservative In Your Estimates: 

It is better to undervalue a project than to promise the moon. This ties into 
making sure your estimates are as accurate as possible, not just guesswork. 
Talk to the teams impacted to better understand their time limitations and 
morale levels. This will also help decrease potential resentment leading 
from workflow disruption.

•  Solving The Base Issues First 

If you can’t trust the accuracy of the data you are working with, then the 
best predictive maintenance model in the world will still fail. While high-tech 
POC projects can help drive company buy in, you need to make sure your 
data is coming from trusted sources, consistent, and updates automatically, 
otherwise no data project will succeed.

10

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuHOW TO INCREASE ROI

The next question to ask after calculating ROI is: how can I improve the ROI I get from my data and 
data science initiatives? This may mean gathering new data from untapped sources, or it may mean 
improving the productivity of the data team as a whole. Simply purchasing a tool or hiring a team to 
do data science will not magically bring ROI - there is no silver bullet. It takes organizational change 
throughout (from high-level management down to each individual contributor) to get value from data. 
One way to make it easier to calculate the ROI of data science projects, technologies, and tools moving 
forward is by setting clear KPIs that are put in place and tracked over time. At a minimum, this means 
tracking: 

•  The number of projects delivered per month 
•  Time from start to prototype and from start to production 
•  Project completion - that is, the ratio of projects deployed to production vs. requests from 

business teams (or other teams across the enterprise)

11

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuCONCLUSION

Most businesses investing in data science are unable to accurately calculate the ROI on that investment. 
Because of this challenge, companies who have not yet fully taken the plunge in leveraging their data 
for machine learning projects may be reluctant to invest in things like data science tools that make it 
happen. But by taking the time to consider and quantify the potential gains, data teams can be well 
set up and positioned to prioritize the right projects to deliver on the promised value that data science 
holds.

12

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataiku300+
CUSTOMERS
30,000+
ACTIVE USERS

*data scientists, analysts, engineers, & more

Your Path to
Enterprise AI

Dataiku is the platform democratizing access to data 
and enabling enterprises to build their own path to AI. 
To make this vision of Enterprise AI a reality, Dataiku is 
the only platform on the market that provides one 
simple UI for data wrangling, mining, visualization, 
machine learning, and deployment based on 
a collaborative and team-based user interface accessible 
to anyone on a data team, from data scientist 
to beginner analyst.

1.  Clean & Wrangle

5.   Monitor & Adjust

Network_dataset

2

2

Teradata

Test

Train

MLlib_Prediction

Oracle

HDFS_Avro

Joined_Data

Amazon_S3

HDFS_Parquet

Test_Scored

Netezza

Vertica

Cassandra

4.  Deploy
       to production

2.  Build + Apply
      Machine Learning

3.  Mining
      & Visualization

dataiku.com

13

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataiku14

©2020 Dataiku, Inc. | www.dataiku.com | contact@dataiku.com | @dataikuW H I T E   P A P E R

www.dataiku.com

